Thesis Gateway Statement - Second Draft (v2.10)
===============================================

We live surrounded by objects that interface between our world and code space—the realm of the algorithm. These ubiquitous objects embody the threshold between the strict structures of data and the fluid, complex nature of all that exists outside of the screen.
I am fascinated by our subjective experiences of this technologically-mediated threshold; the point of interaction between computational systems and the personal and idiosyncratic. Emotional exchanges that take place entirely in ASCII text characters; memories meta-tagged with geographic coordinates powered by a global satellite network; social dysfunctionalism manifested in status updates over HTTP via TCP/IP. How is the ‘cultural layer’ (Manovich) of these experiences affected, diluted or enhanced through their digital mediation? What occurs when we take the subjective, the peculiar and the personal and force them into these rigid digital structures? Broadly, much of my work has examined this mapping of the idiosyncratic and the experiential onto strict structures including code, maps, diagrams and physical form. More specifically, a number of my recent projects have dealt with the relationship between computationally driven or derived objects and the ritualization of these interactions.
As a designer, maker and programmer working in this context, I want to experiment with speculative interaction design that encourages people to develop a critical view of their relationships with technology and design. I create provocations for rethinking both our behavior and the behavior of code in our everyday interactions; questioning what it means to be human in an increasingly digitized, data- driven world. Referencing Critical Design, I want to design interactions that challenge the “narrow assumptions, preconceptions and givens” (Dunne & Raby, 2007) that exist within the interaction- spaces surrounding us. My design methodology is inspired by speculative technology-based practices including BERG, the Near Future Laboratory, LUST, Lukas Franciszkiewicz, Jürg Lehni and Marc Owens. I employ both centripetal and centrifugal modes of design research as described by Rosenberg (2000), using explorative methods that encourage a dialogue between the “constructive and destructive” or “rational and irrational” elements of the creative process. My methods of making include code and programming; mapping, diagraming and visualizing objective and subjective ‘data’; procedural model-making; and technical prototyping.
My thesis will explore the point of interface between the digital and the personal as a place of ritual both in the interaction for the user but also in the ritual nature of code itself. Through reflecting on my recent work, I have identified three key areas of investigation: (i) Code as Ritual, (ii) Interaction as Ritual and (iii) Speculative Rituals from Computational Objects.
1—Code as Ritual
----------------
Code itself can be understood as a ritual: a series of symbolic actions performed according to a prescribed order. Code is a predetermined sequence of symbolic actions; symbolic in that they must be interpreted, or compiled, by the machine into combinations of 0s and 1s before being computed.
Some of my recent projects have explored inverting and modifying this ritual structure of code. “Logicless Computing” disrupted the procedural nature of code by requiring human users to supply the logic required at every step of a computational process. My “Physical Pixels” project brought computational routines outside of the machine to inform procedural methods of making. What further avenues of design exploration might disruption of and speculation about code rituals open up? How can the structures of code create generative, computational and emergent forms?
2—Interaction as Ritual-----------------------
Rituals are one of the most ancient methods of communicating and controlling the flow of information. I am interested in examining how the “metaphorical and transcendent power” of rituals can provide “guidance, emotional connection, modes of coping and stimulus” for interactions that more literal means cannot (referencing Phil van Allen’s ideas of mythological interaction). For millennia, we’ve used rituals, stories and myths to understand and explain the incredibly complex world around us. We’ve developed rituals and patterns through which we interact with this world, helping us to place ourselves within it and ultimately find meaning. Why then, in recent years with the dawn of these new technologies, have we decided that we need entirely new models for our interactions?“Coping Mechanisms” embodied the neurotic habits of a competitive lock picker in the custom technological objects of his morning routine. The project became a means for me to question how technological rituals, patterns and routines provide us with meaning and identity at both an individual and societal level.

How might rituals inspire new interactions? How might these interactions in tern create new rituals of the digital age? How can our individual and odd personal rituals be designed as interactions that disrupt our increasingly ordered and systemized lives, introducing opportunities for meaning-making and serendipity?
3—Speculative Rituals from Computational Objects
------------------------------------------------
Through my work at Grad Media Design, I have begun to explore objects embedded with code: algorithmically generated forms; and embodied interactions that incorporate technical prototypes. “Between Moments” used the everyday data of a deceased person’s life to create a parametric architectural form as a ritual space for remembering their life and all that can’t be captured through data. “P.A.U.S.E.S.” questioned the new rituals of the social networking space through a speculative product that autonomously interpreted and shared every physical activity and interaction.
These objects became ritual spaces inhabited by code, transforming simple code into material form; abstract concepts made concrete. Such objects can become storytelling spaces, inhabited by the written story of code which, when executed, transform both the story and the object itself.
New rituals are emerging and existing rituals are being redefined. As a designer, how can I initiate a dialogue about these rituals through objects? How can designed computational objects subvert and recontextualize existing rituals and create new ones?

- - -
Computation is an embodiment of strict rituals; both of interaction and of code. Everyday these strict procedural routines interact with our arbitrary and idiosyncratic personal rituals. In this context, my thesis work will examine how interactions with computationally informed, derived or driven objects can augment these existing rituals and create the new emergent rituals of the Digital Age.

- - -

Written 10 April 2012