# Designing Agency
## Dissolving User Sovereignty in the Networked Social
### (A Declaration of Interdepedence)

- - -

Since Hobbes' *Leviathan*, Locke's *Second Treatise*, and Smith's *Wealth of Nations*, the individual (her self-interest, self-ownership, and self-agency) has been embedded unquestioningly as the node-level building block of the systems we inhabit: interfaces, networks, nations…

The Internet was to usher in a new era — disrupting boundaries at every scale from the Westphalian state to the Lockean Self — and creating utopian conditions for a cybernetic post-individualism: collective consciousness, the global brain. -But the Information Age's emergence, from the feudal and then hierarchical, has not yet yielded the distributed, egalitarian ideal the Network promised.- Instead, the contemporary Internet is an ideological Frankenstein: globally-connected collectivism awkwardly fused with neoliberal individualism. -Numerous fracture-points show this experiment's failings.-

This hybrid *interdividualism* positions the self/citizen/user/agent as the pivotal hub in a new economics of information, where personal data and self-expression become currency, and market-practices are applied to social relations. This ubiquitous foregrounding of the *I*, anecdotally captured in Apple's product-naming (iPod, iPhone, iLife, etc.), is present at every level of the network stack, from social profile to selfish interface to solipsistic device. Steve Job's Leviathan sees the sovereign consumer reigning over their own User-Centred edition of 'reality' -/kingdom- . -We find ourselves- more interconnected than ever before, -but- our interactions and experiences are discretely individual: radically tailored and meticulously bespoke.

-How might the invisible interdependence (of systems, structures, and, ultimately, people) that lies beneath the selfish interface might be brought to the foreground?- Challenging User-Centered Design's assumption that agency must always lie with the individual, my work speculates as to how networked devices, interfaces and systems might be designed with alternative ideological foundations. Incorporating collaborative, collective, and self-effacing interactions, a series of projects injected -/implemented- at various points across the network stack counteract, disrupt, and offer alternatives to this technologically-embedded individualism.