# Tactics: Beyond an Individualistic Social Web

> "In a world where we post the majority of our personal data online, and states and corporations wield invasive tools to collect and market the rest, there is something profoundly hopeful in… effacement of the self… [It] enables participants to practice a kind of individuality beyond… possessive individualism." (Coleman, 2012)

In the context of the dominant individualistic ideology of the social web, I am primarily interested in exploring tactics for the "effacement of the self", designing technologically-mediated social experiences and spaces that offer alternatives to these self-centric interactions. My work seeks to disrupt the user from their role as such, defamiliarising the individualism of User-Centered Design and offering alternatives for contemporary connected social spaces. In response to the *faux social* of such social networks, how might other technological expressions or experiences of the collective provide an alternative to the possessive individualism of neoliberalism?

De Certeau (1984, p 37) defines "tactics" as ways to artfully "use, manipulate, and divert" the cultural products and spaces imposed by an external power. He describes tactics that trace "indeterminate trajectories that are apparently meaningless, since they do not cohere with the constructed, written, and prefabricated space through which they move." (1984, p35) The city, which cannot be tactically reshaped through physical reorganisation, can be adapted to one's needs by choosing how to move through it. In contrast, network architecture and the format of web-connected client devices allows for a certain amount of adapting and restructuring of its constituent elements. In the context of the web, these social spaces can be broken down into multiple elements to be rebuilt and reshaped, through both endorsed methods—APIs (application programming interfaces), metadata, web feeds and similar protocols—and non-endorsed approaches—hacks, browser overrides, and html scraping.

What are the collective *tactics* that might be deployed within these individual-focussed *strategies*? I will outline two tactical approaches, which can be understood as alternative models for design, that leverage the structure and protocols of these social spaces to subvert, adapt and offer alternative ways to inhabit them. They are built on two  conceptions of the Self: diffusion and multiplexing. In interactions that obscure the Individual, either amidst their own data fragments, or amidst the collective, there lies the potential to encourage and enable an alternative approach.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

## Diffusion: Embracing the Fragmented Dividual

Diffusion sees the fragmented individual dispersed across the network: embracing the Deleuzian, subdivided dividual as a means to render the individual "unmappable." Staying within the defined boundaries of the social network, this approach designs tools and techniques that aim to hide or obscure the individual, or liberate the *user* from market-oriented consumerism. By welcoming this dissolution of the individual into multiple data elements, we subvert the strategic data-gathering systems that mark us as dividuals.

Ben Grosser's [Demetricator](http://bengrosser.com/projects/facebook-demetricator/) explicitly seeks to remove one important element in the market ideology of Facebook through removing the metrics constantly displayed to the user that "measure and present our social value and activity, enumerating friends, likes, comments, and more." It is a web browser add-on that hides these metrics: '36 people like this' becomes 'people like this' and 'having 105 friends' becomes simply 'having friends.'

> "Demetricator invites Facebook’s users to try the system without the numbers, to see how their experience is changed by their absence. With this work I aim to disrupt the prescribed sociality these metrics produce, enabling a network society that isn’t dependent on quantification." (Grosser, 2012)

I developed a similar project shortly before discovering Grosser's work which also uses javascript within the browser to affect Facebook's interface. [Facebook Anonify](http://blog.johndryan.me/post/34657898214/facebook-anonify-a-quick-experiment-to-remove) aims to disassociate the post and data fragments from the Individuals who posted them by removing all profile photographs and replacing all user's name with their numeric user id.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

## Multiplexing the Individual in the Collective

Multiplexing is a technical term used in telecommunications and computer networks that "enable[s] (a line) to carry several signals simultaneously" (Oxford English Dictionary) by combining multiple signals into one over a shared medium. I see multiplexing as a useful metaphor for collective experience that transcends the individual. Collective rituals have a rich history spanning many cultures—musical gatherings, protest crowds, religious congregations, collective storytelling—and can provide alternative models for this multiplexing of the self in the social. Such rituals offer communal, egalitarian, and immersive models for designing collective experiences.

I see an opportunity for an experience of the networked individual that is completely engulfed within the collective. In my work, I seek to create technologically-mediated social spaces that interface with the collective; multiplexing the individual in collective experiences and entities which see the collective node take precedence over the individual. 

A pertinent example lies in the *nomadic resistant model* of hacker culture, which Galloway (2004) describes. These tactical collective entities, such as Anonymous exist inside the strategic, standardised presences of the web's protocols, social networks and communication channels. Individuals coalesce around a specific action or problem under the Anonymous banner creating a resistance that originates from many different places. Once complete, the collective dissolves.

Numerous designers and artists have also engaged with ways of representing and interacting with the Internet in a more collectivising way. [Listening Post](http://www.earstudio.com/projects/listeningpost.html) by Mark Hansen and Ben Rubin, is one such example. It is an installation that pulls text fragments containing the phrase "I am…" from thousands of chat rooms in real time. These extracts are then displayed on a suspended grid of over 200 small liquid-crystal displays, while at the same time being read by a computer-generated voice. It offers an interesting contrast between the literal individualism of these "I am" conversational extracts and the collective experience of engaging with them all simultaneously. Its format offers both a dissolution of the text from its author and original context, along with multiplexing it into a coherent collective whole.

> "At a stroke Listening Post fulfils the promise of most Internet-based art, affecting a simultaneous collapse and expansion of time and space with implications ranging from notions of private and public space to individual thought and its role in group dynamics." (Eleey, 2003)

What Listening Post doesn't offer is any interaction that enables the viewer themselves to contribute to or participate in the collective. [PRIZM](http://blog.johndryan.me/post/38054215831/prizm) was a project I undertook to create a multiplexed self in a way that was built directly on user input.

PRIZM's interface takes a selection of personal information through a custom interface which includes a magnetic card swipe (for Driver’s License and other card information), a camera with facial recognition, a custom fingerprint scanner (webcam and threshold image-processing) and a keyboard for text data entry. Over the course of the project’s exhibition, data was collected from visitors. A second screen alongside the input interface displayed continually generated collective identities from the submitted data.

The project fell short in the ‘language’ of identity systems that I chose to use. The ID cards, fingerprints and other identity systems in this project, are obviously more associated with strategic systems of power and control rather than a more tactical experience of collective identity. Moving forward, my current work endeavours to link the experience of the collective in Listening Post with the more interactive participation for the user that I was aiming for in PRIZM.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

### The Experience of Losing Oneself in the Crowd

One might ask, with this sacrificing of capability to perceive or represent oneself directly, why would anyone want to participate in such a system? Would an individual limit themselves to experience the collective? I think there is evidence in current systems for this limiting of self to partake in something. On Facebook, for example, you actively choose to sacrifice particular liberties (i.e. privacy, control) to be part of a larger collective experience. The user also, as previously discussed, limits how they are represented to the format and structures of Facebook.

In trying to achieve a dissolution into a group that is not negative, I am primarily interested in the *experience* of the self in this collective setting. How can you interface as an individual through an interaction with the collective in which you lose yourself? Removing the individualistic self, what is it like to experience the shared or collective self? What freedom or escape might be possible from the agendas I've previously outlined? I'm interested in what the experience of connectedness might feel like, mediated through these technological interfaces.

Freud uses the term "oceanic feeling" in an attempt to define the psychological feeling of religion. A person experiences this emotion when they have a sense of being continuous with the rest of the universe. He describes it as “a feeling of an indissoluble bond, of being one with the external world as a whole.” (1930) He theorises that this experience of being connected beyond the self, is "a vestige of infantile consciousness prior to the time when the infant begins to distinguish himself from his human and non-human environment" (Roberts); a time before the self has formed for the infant. Might it be possible to experience something similar when interacting in a subversive, augmented reality that inhibits you from perceiving yourself—perhaps enabling moments of bypassing the limits of the self?

In designing tactical interactions that enable diffusion or multiplexing of the individual, I am interested in creating such experiences that might enable individuals to feel this "oceanic" connectedness with the collective.

[Continue reading&rarr;](Thesis%20Paper%20-%20Part%20V%20-%20Conclusion.md#readme)