# Introduction

Like other tools before it, the Internet reflects the ideological conditions it has developed within. The strategies of the corporately owned social web 2.0[<sup id="fn1link">1</sup>](#fn1), which have come to dominate the contemporary Internet, promote a very particular understanding of the Individual, one that heavily promotes the ideals of Western Individualism and Neoliberal Consumerism. 

This ideological Individualism is embedded deeply within these systems and technologies, designed into their format and function through User-Centered Design methodologies, rigid standardised presences, and adopted market-practices applied to relational interactions that commodify the individual. These are strategies, as described by de Certeau (1984), used by institutions and power structures to "produce, tabulate, and impose" this ideological understanding of the individual.[<sup id="fn2link">2</sup>](#fn2)

I believe that Design can encourage and enable a kind of individuality beyond possessive Western Individualism. My work explores tactical approaches that “use, manipulate, and divert” the particular Individualism imposed on us strategically in these networked social spaces. Using tactics that I will refer to as *diffusion* and *multiplexing*, I endeavour to move towards a more collective understanding of the social web. As networked life expands beyond the screen into objects and places, I believe that it is crucial to explore tactical design that counteracts, disrupts, and offers alternatives to this technologically-embedded individualism.

[Continue reading&rarr;](Thesis%20Paper%20-%20Part%20II%20-%20Individualism.md#readme)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

1. <small id="fn1">Web 2.0 is a term that has been in use since approximately 2000 to describe web sites and technologies that go beyond the 'static' pages of the earlier web. It implies  more user-generated content and social relations, which enable interactions beyond passive viewing. [&#8617;](#fn1)</small>
2. <small id="fn2">It is interesting to note how, in the history of the Web, a shift can be perceived from the tactical to the strategic. The presence and communication of a minority of early-adopters in weblogs, chat rooms and IRC networks—means of communicating and forming community that were initially run and owned by the individuals using them (primarily hackers, technologists and academics)—was predominantly tactical. What once was tactical is now strategic; this social and collective use of the web, which has now become mainstream in Web 2.0, takes place almost entirely within the standardised presences of corporately-owned social networks. [&#8617;](#fn2)</small> 