# Individualism

Individualism is "a mode of life in which the individual pursues his own ends or follows out his own ideas." (Oxford English Dictionary) This ethical egoism (that moral agents ought to do what is in their own self-interest) is a key element in the Western capitalist cultural systems. 

Modern philosophy, emerging during the Enlightenment, sought to distinguish the individual from society, particularly in the work of key thinkers such as Hobbes and Locke. The freedom to understand one's own reality, determine one's own future and decide about one's own beliefs, brought a liberation from existing religious, class, and other social categories. Individualism was central to the emerging dominant economic system of capitalism—a key reason why it has become so fundamental.

Political scientist, C. B. Macpherson (1962) identified this as "possessive" individualism, defined as "those deeply internalized habits of thinking and feeling" whereby we view "everything around [us] primarily as actual or potential commercial property." (Coleman, 2012) Macpherson's individual understands themselves, their skills, and those of others as a commodity to be bought and sold on the open market. At the core of possessive individualism lies an insatiable thirst for selfish consumption, which is considered central to human nature.

This possessive individualism emerged in an aggressive form with the rise of neoliberal economic policies, following the abandonment of Keynesian policies in the 1970s and 80s (those which advocated more government intervention in the markets). Neoliberal policies seek to increase the role of the private-sector in society through opening markets, deregulating trade, and privatising public service. Neoliberalism understands individual economic freedom as central; reducing government interference in the economy paves the way for the individual to sustain themselves, and ultimately prosper, in the marketplace. Essentially, the belief is that if each person is given the 'freedom' to take control of their lives and prosper, they will do so.

> "Neoliberalism… proposes that human well-being can best be advanced by liberating individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills within an institutional framework characterized by strong private property rights, free markets, and free trade." (Harvey, 2007, p 2)

At both economic and ideological levels, neoliberalism has profoundly impacted capitalist Western culture. Beyond simply a set of economic policies, it is particularly evident as a broader worldview in attitudes towards the individual and society. Margaret Thatcher famously declared that there was, "no such thing as society, only individual men and women". (Harvey, p 23) Individualism, private property and personal responsibility for oneself take precedence over social solidarity. We see a subtle shift from the role of the individual as citizen (contributing to and responsible for a society around them) to the role of the individual as consumer (free to earn and buy the life that they desire). Accompanying this, is the subtle logic that individual rights take precedence over individual responsibilities.

This rise in individualism contrasts sharply with the reality of our increasing reliance on the global community. Independent living, at least at a material level, is nearly impossible in today's world, and yet the facade of personal material independence is perhaps more prevalent than ever before. In response to this curious contrast, between the modern trend towards individualism and our increasing reliance on the global community, there is a neoliberal conception of this global connectedness: one which understands and encourages interconnection and interdependence in respect to the market. 

> "In­creas­ing­ly, neoliberalism af­firms tech­nol­o­gy’s fan­ta­sy of wholeness to tell us who “we” are in a glob­al sense. We are those con­nect­ed to each oth­er through ex­change, the ex­change of commodities as well as of con­tri­bu­tions. On the Internet, we are free to buy an­y­thing from an­y­where at any time." (Dean, 2009, p 56) 

As a cultural phenomenon, neoliberalism creates a tendency for the individual to apply the values of the marketplace to all spheres of life, including the social and cultural.

> "In personal ethics, the general neoliberal vision is that every human being is an entrepreneur managing their own life, and should act as such." (Treanor, 2005, p)

In this *everything-entrepreneurship*, pursuing and expressing individuality is encouraged, in so far as it can be expressed through purchasing power. I am my own person, and I can do whatever I want; I express this through capitalising whenever and however possible, thus providing myself with the liberty to purchase whatever I want in life. In this way, an individualistic understanding of one's identity, and the importance of the financial conditions to obtain and consume the building blocks of this desired identity, becomes central to sustaining the neoliberal economic system.

> Neoliberal ideology does not produce its subjects by interpolating them into symbolically anchored identities (structured according to conventions of gender, race, work, and national citizenship). Instead, it enjoins subjects to develop our creative potential and cultivate our individuality. Communicative capitalism’s circuits of entertainment and consumption supply the ever new experiences and accessories we use to perform this self-fashioning — I must be fit! I must be stylish! I must realize my dreams. I must because I can— everyone wins. If I don’t, not only am I a loser but I am not a person at all. I am not part of everyone. (Dean, 2009, p 66)

It is this individualism that is not only encouraged, but I believe embedded, within the social networking systems of the contemporary Internet.

[Continue reading&rarr;](Thesis%20Paper%20-%20Part%20III%20-%20Strategies.md#readme)